hey everyone I am here in Los Angeles
ahead of the players summit that's
taking place tomorrow joined right now
by Hal B agus who is the head of the
Players Association is that the formal
name of it cuz I've heard several
different names of what the player
association is the actual formal name is
the North American League of Legends
Championship Series Players Association
that's that's quite a mouthful let's go
with sorry its its North American LCS
League Championship Series Players
Association we're just using the
abbreviation its na LCS PA na LCS PA and
it's kind of learn a little bit about
what's been going on because this was
something i sat down with Whelan and
Jared when they announced that riot
would be supporting this at the end of
2016 now about a year and a half later
you know I think we're just now starting
to hear a little bit about what you guys
have been doing behind the scenes so
yeah maybe we can start off with your
background for those that don't know
sort of your work in the sports world
sure I've been in the sports world for
about 20 years now I started off at the
National Basketball Players Association
as an attorney left there is assistant
general counsel after 12 years during my
time at the Players Association I had a
lot of different responsibilities I
represented players and grievance
hearings with teams I was part of the
collective bargaining negotiation team
so I negotiated two and a half CBA's
with the NBA and three WNBA CBA's I
represented players and/or I've worked
with players and agents and resolving
agent disputes did a lot of different
things you know the job we were a small
organization with a you know with a lot
of different businesses one of the last
things I did when I worked there was we
had purchased a building in Harlem to be
the headquarters of The Players
Association and I along with the CFO
oversaw the project that converted the
building from like a really badly
deteriorated building into a gleaming
new headquarters so quite a great deal
of work on sort of the negotiation side
and the representation side in the
sports world how did you end up getting
involved
in all this League of Legends stuff
because I assume you aside from the
sports stuff maybe not so much of an
eSports are gaming background not so
much of a gaming background no I was
after the Players Association I worked
at two different sports agencies
Wasserman Media Group and Excel Sports
Management Wasserman's la-based Excel is
New York there was I mean I being in the
sports world you know you know what's
going on in sports generally it's just
part of your job to you know read the
sports business daily and and you know
the different web sites Yahoo ESPN etc
and so I knew what he sports was I was
very interested in what was going on in
the space but you know had no neither of
the agencies I worked with had any
presence in eSports at that time so my
introduction a riot came through I was
contacted by riot Chris Greely who told
me that they were looking to help the
players form a Players Association a
trade association and would it be
something that I was interested in
learning more about and so that sort of
was the genesis of it and maybe you can
help me construct a timeline because I
know that there have the association's
been operating behind the scenes for a
little bit so around what time were you
you contacted and what was sort of the
the process of you coming in because I
know that the players voted on you as
one of the representative of the as
their representative sure so the process
I believe the contact was March or April
of 2017 there was a I guess some vetting
that was going on at the different
people that they were gonna talk to and
introduced to the players I met with the
players in early June of 2017 the
players voted after that meeting amongst
the people that they had seen
and I was I won the election um and so I
was officially notified like you know
whatever week later I think the election
took a week and then negotiated you know
a structure with riot and so I'd say I
started sometime in mid July 2017 very
good so what what has happened since
then because it does sound like there's
been some work yeah there I mean you
mentioned behind the scenes a lot of it
has been behind the scenes we're at the
point now or I think we're really too
ready to announce to the world what
we're doing and and you know what our
plans are for the the near future behind
the scenes it's it's been a lot of
one-on-one work you know I've been
spending time getting to know the
players had several different meetings
with the players over the last year
we've had a education educational
presentation I brought in a professor to
come talk to the players about finance
and and you know different aspects of
investing you know it's something that
the players in indicated they needed you
know and evidenced by the fact that
quite a few in the room have their money
and savings accounts so so you know and
that's a big part of what we're going to
do going forward just at different
educational programs and and and
seminars to help them with their both
their on and off court experiences
the next thing I'm working on is the
stress management seminar somebody to
come in and talk about ways to reduce
and and and handle stress so we've also
been or you know doing all the paperwork
to become recognized as a as a trade
association their requirements you have
to file with both the state and which er
you're organising in which in our case
is New York and also the federal
government you have to file for 501 C 6
certification which is a non taxable
entity status so there's a lot of
paperwork a lot of
work just getting all that in and and
prepared and finalized and some of it
gets kicked back and you have to go back
and present additional materials so that
and then on the player level I've last
free agency cycle at the end of 2017 I
assisted a bunch of players with their
individual contract negotiations with
their teams players that didn't have
agents I've assisted some players with
Aging issues and we've also assisted
some players with some off the you know
off the field or off the the playing
surface issues so what what is it like
because I do know that there's a rise in
player agency representation that's
occurring a lot of these players are
signing with agents or representatives
managers for the first time in in as
long as I can remember I'm hearing that
a lot are is the Association a
comparable option to these two agents if
a player wanted to could they work with
the Association instead do you do you
still recommend they get agents or
managers what is your stance on you know
overall player representation and what
role the Association plays in that yes
yes no yes no I don't get all the
questions come back at me with any I'm
just looking for a general discussion
right about what the role in all this is
so yes I mean the short answer is yes
you know like I'm I've negotiated my
entire career as a lawyer so I'm you
know ready willing and able to help any
player who needs help in any contract or
other legal matter that I'm capable of
assisting them and personally and
professionally I believe that agents are
generally very beneficial you know as
long as the agent is is qualified as you
know someone who's knowledgeable in the
field and understands the marketplace
and you know as a competent negotiator
and and
you know understands a contract language
I think that you know they're vastly
beneficial for players you know it helps
level I level the playing field you know
players are going against teams that are
you know business executives you know
lawyers you know the people that are
extremely knowledgeable and conversion
in this and you know in in negotiations
and in contracts and you know against
you know a 17 the 25 year old who is
probably their first job so you know I
think it's critical that you know that
you balance the playing field and and
give the player some advantages in that
situation and agents are very capable of
doing that and so I'm an advocate I
think we've got some really good agents
out there working on behalf of the
players and and I you know encourage
players that you know at the appropriate
time that you know they should get an
agent but if there's a gap they don't
have one or there's an issue with their
agent you know I'm here to help fill
that the players association in the
League of Legends scene is very
different from traditional sports than
that and traditional sports those are
and forgive my ignorance here because I
do I come more from the eSports and
gaming background than the sports side
but my understanding is that all those
associations and unions for the most
part are funded by the players
themselves whereas this is really a
thing that was kicked off on the
publisher side the league operator side
with Riot Games how do you balance and
how do you manage sort of what seems to
be a pretty big and obvious conflict of
interest even if it's a conflict of
interest that occurs because of a
well-meaning decision sure I look on the
surface I understand why it appears to
be a conflict of interest but you know
like I'm a lawyer and and you know
I'm very aware of conflict of interest
and and you know and and seek to avoid
that at all cost this is an instance
where you know there's an appearance of
conflict of interest but and the reality
is that's not the case
you know riot is funding the the has
committed to fund the first couple years
of The Players Association and you know
which I think frankly I give them a lot
of credit and laud them for because they
were progressive enough to recognize
that this was a need that their players
had and and you know they felt that it
was something it was probably gonna be
difficult for the players to get off the
ground on their own so they stepped into
the breach and and and helped facilitate
this so you know I think they get a lot
of credit for that they also get a lot
of credit for saying you know here's the
resources it's your association you run
it there I don't have to report to them
I don't you know tell them things that
we're thinking about or doing you know
we're gonna negotiate over different
things and you know hopefully you know
it'll never be out of cereal but if it
needs to be it will be you know but you
know there's a good relationship there
they're very player friendly you know
it's a different context and you see in
the traditional sports where you have
like a league that is basically run by
and set up by the owners and you know
they're there ostensibly as the Guardian
the league but really they're they're
paid employees of the owners so you know
this this is the developer sits in a
very different position than then league
does in that sort if you're looking at
it from that sort of three party context
where there's like a league owners
players this is a developer team's
players and it's just a different
circumstance so you know riot I think
was pressing enough to recognize that
players having leverage and being able
to advocate for themselves is beneficial
for the overall growth of the sport in
general what do you think the position
of the players is right now within the
league there was a time a couple years
ago where in some of my more opinion
pieces of content I I said that I
actually felt like players should have
transparent salaries because I felt like
a lot of players didn't have any concept
of what the salaries were in the space
and what
people who might be better than them or
worse than them we're all in the game or
from a brand perspective we're getting
paid it in my opinion it feels like a
lot of that has changed in the past 12
months there's a lot of players we've
heard rumors of being able to negotiate
really great salaries for themselves and
have a pretty good position of leverage
so I'm curious you working behind the
scenes with the players with the teams
with the league what you're your take is
on their position within the system well
I'm a huge advocate of as I said before
leveling the field and and I think that
you know one of the most effective ways
to do that is for there to be salary
transparency and you know riot provided
to us aggregate salary numbers which you
know we provided to the players and I
think they in the agents and they I
think we're helpful in negotiations one
of the things that I've talked to
numerous players about and and I think
one of the things we'll discuss if not
decide on tomorrow is for the is the the
creating its salary database so whenever
a player negotiates a contract or you
know has their you know an offer on the
table they'll provide that information
to the Players Association and we'll you
know we'll make it available to the
other players and you know what to
decide you know is it something that
everyone gets or you know to mid laners
get what other mid laners are making you
know like you know where how is the
information shared will be one of the
key discussion points but I do think
that you know the players seem very
supportive of the concept
I certainly am an advocate of it and I
think that that will go a long way in
helping the players in their
negotiations with the teams well that
transparency really helps do you think
overall that the players have a pretty
good position right now in terms of
negotiation not not just in terms of
salaries but their ability to negotiate
a number of different things you know at
whatever salary or whatever contract
limit or term they want or any of those
types of things yeah it means it's great
having a system that doesn't really have
a lot of constraints you know you look
at some of the more traditional sports
and their limits on on you know how many
years a contract can be how much the
increases can be you know whether or not
the contracts are guaranteed
whether or not you know they're
oftentimes caps on how much money
somebody can earn you know we don't have
any of those in this system yet and I
think that's very beneficial for players
but you know there are a lot of things
in the contracts that you know our very
team friendly you know the marketing and
sponsorship rights you know the the IP
rights that the players have that they
are conveying to the teams there are
obligations away from playing you know
the streaming obligations that they have
to do you know there are a lot of things
in in in the agreement that I think can
be adjusted to to make things more
favorable for the for the players and
and not only economically but also just
from working conditions and and time
spent and commitments how would you or
will you go about getting those changes
enacted is it just a situation where you
look at a contract expiring and you just
try to negotiate for more favorable
terms at the re-up or if a player
transfers or is this something that is a
more comprehensive strategy that that
requires players going to owners
collectively or I mean how will these
changes kind of come about both you know
I think you know really you have to use
leverage where you have leverage and one
of the best ways is when you've got
players who are highly coveted you know
they need to go and push the envelope in
terms of you know what they can get in
their contract so that's that's one end
of it and then you know the other side
of it is you need to go and and work
collectively and and you know I think
that you know certainly Riot has been
receptive to the having discussions
about different contract issues that
I've come up you know come across or
that agents have pointed out and you
know we'll have those discussions and
you know unlike in a traditional union
setting where there's collective
bargaining and you know you're required
to bargain and you know there are
obligations we don't have those same
obligations but we have other you know
we have the collective will of the
players so you know that's important and
then beyond that if there's bad faith in
bargaining we have other
legal recourses - so and I think that
there's lots of opportunity to change
things for the better
you know both through my direct
negotiation of the riot and through
individual players really sort of
pushing the boundaries stepping away
from contract negotiations or
specifically things that aren't related
to salary and that kind of thing there
are maybe this is more on the honest a
player's verse riot versus players first
team but you know the players have a
certain relationship with the teams the
players also have a certain relationship
with riot riot as the publisher in the
league operator dictates how many games
are played each season they dictate if
players get paid to go to the all-star
matches they they have a lot of
different areas in which players
experience things based on how Riot
Games decides they want to operate are
these areas that you're looking to get
involved with because I frequently hear
players frustrated by either the length
of the season or compensation around
events that are not specifically the LCS
and their involvement in it or any
number of different things are these
conversations and and situations that
you think the Players Association can
assist the players with and have they
already in some cases I don't know yes I
do think that these are those among
those are situations that we can assist
the players with and we have had some
discussions about specific areas of
player concern you know the change in
format of how many games or matches are
played you know that was a discussion
that we've had with riot and they you
know I've gone back and looked at that
and I think they've made some
adjustments to that or willing to going
forward yeah I mean look it's all
frankly I think we're really operating
with a blank slate here it's all on the
table for discussion if it's an
important if it's an issue that's
important enough to a substantial enough
number of players it's something that
you know will will engage riot with
and/or the teams with the relationship
with the teams one of the leverage
points that you mentioned is if you have
a big name that is going to potentially
sign with a team there's a negotiation
process around the signing with right it
feels like there's less opportunity for
negotiation in feel free to correct me
if I'm wrong but it you know it's if if
riot wants to change the format the
don't really have any recourse they
can't say well I'm not gonna sign with
riot you know unlike a team so how what
are the negotiation points that you see
in the relationship between the Players
Association and riot in in traditional
sports like my understanding is that
things just come to a head and the
players say they're not gonna play is
that is that a leverage point I mean how
does this work in in the League of
Legends world sure I mean like that's
always that's always a leverage point
yeah and and unlike in traditional
sports where there may be prohibitions
about when a strike or a lockout can
happen there are none in this and in
this industry so you know if there was
something that was happening that the
players felt strongly enough about and
there was no recourse you know from the
negotiation side of it then yeah the
players deciding that they're gonna not
participate in a you know and in a match
on the weekend or you know not go to
worlds or what you know those are all
options hopefully that's something that
you know we never have to get to and you
know by all indications I think riot is
is willing to discuss you know almost
anything and you know we'll see how far
those discussions advance but you know
there are lots of different leverage
points you know that's an extreme one
but it's certainly something that we
have and if need be if the circumstance
is dictated you know that's you know we
would go there supported it kind of
rounding out the questions you have a
summit tomorrow and and my I'm somewhat
curious because I know that you guys
have you had you've had multiple summits
before this right now just one no I mean
there was there was a summit last there
was a summit last year where I presented
and I've had numerous meetings with the
players but I wouldn't like nothing I
would say is as comprehensive as a
summit like tomorrow is gonna be a multi
hour day and you know we'll spend a lot
of time discussing you know things that
have happened and and things we need to
discussed in order to move forward on
different on different tracks so the
meetings in the past have been more
focused and and you know less less time
time commitment what what do you expect
the turnout to be for the summit
tomorrow I'm optimistic that we're gonna
have a significant number of the players
there I mean
don't you know I don't know that we'll
have everybody but you know I'm hoping
that we'll have you know a large number
the reason I bring this up is just
because I have heard that the players
while they all seem to like the idea of
having a Players Association their
commitment to the Association at times
feels lacking or that they kind of
expect it to be like oh the other
players will help this and I'll I'll do
this or I'll just you know sleep in or
play video games similarly you know
having it on a Wednesday which is
typically like a scrim day I don't know
how many teams schedule scrims on top or
if you guys are able to negotiate like
no this is a black out time you can't
schedule scrims so I'm very curious you
know what your assessment is of the
players and their commitment to this so
far and also sort of how you ensure that
the teams don't get in the way of that
by by scheduling scrims for instance
well good questions so the tomorrow was
a blackout day and we've I've had
discussions with riot about establishing
you know whether it's one day a month
one day every other month you know where
there's a free day where we could have
you know whether it's a Players
Association meeting or bring in an
outside expert to talk about whatever
topic of the day we're talking about so
that's something that we're working on
for tomorrow you know I look I I don't
think it's a question of apathy and I
don't know if that's what you were
suggesting but this is a brand new
venture that you know players probably
most of them didn't even know what a
Players Association or trade association
was a year and a half ago so you know
there's a you know there's a there's a
hill that we have to climb you know
there's education we have to provide to
get players to understand you know what
a Players Association is that it's most
effective when as many players as
possible or actively involved you know
tomorrow is going to be a big step
toward really helping us grow our brand
and our identity and by helping by
electing leadership player leadership
you know the players are going to vote
for
their Executive Committee who are gonna
help run the Association will also elect
player reps so each team will have
somebody who is the designee of that
team to get information out and and get
information for the team to myself and
the executive committee so you know it's
a process you know you got to crawl
before you walk walk before you run and
it's you know we're we're getting there
and it's it's incremental but I do think
that you know the players
I mean I've probably at this point
helped in some form or fashion you know
a third of the membership and so I you
know I think it you know it's it's you
make the players association a realistic
thing for as many people as you can as
much as you can and I'm not counting in
that third you know people have attended
seminars or presentations so you know
we're getting there I'm comfortable with
where we are and I recognize we have a
ways to go but you know it's it's you
know we're really you know we're a brand
new thing and and I think that you know
I've been around the NBA Players
Association a MLB Players Association
the NFL Players Association the NHL PA
and you know the those organizations
have all been around for 40 50 60 years
and you know we're not even a year old
so you know we'll get there it's just a
question of how soon so for my last
question I apologize I I asked this
question of Rick Fox once and he said
this is not exists in the sports world
but I always ask Utley in my interviews
if there's anything that you would say
to the community of people out there
that are are invested in and wanting to
see the LCS grow and the players be you
know receive the treatment that they
deserve and all that kind of stuff so I
don't know if there's anything that you
would share with the generally Legends
audience out there about the role of the
Players Association or your role or
anything like that but it was kind of
the opportunity here at the end of the
conversation to do that
what did Rick say that didn't exist Rick
said he's never been asked that question
before he said in traditional sports
he's like in all his career in the NBA
no one ever said anything you want to
say to the people out there but that's
sort of you know that I like to leave
that door open for anybody out there wow
that's a really open-ended question but
I mean I think that you know the support
like I think the players get a
tremendous amount of support they have
you know large followings of fans and
you know the fans I think you're
generally supportive of their efforts
you know I think that that's important
and I'd like to see that continue and
I'd like to see that also that same
level of support and encouragement you
know flow toward the players association
you know we're working the whole idea of
this players association is to work on
behalf and for the benefit of the
players both while they're playing
professionally and after their careers
are over you know a lot of these players
are gonna you know they're gonna retire
by the time they're you know in their
mid 20s and have another 50 years ahead
of them and there's lots of you know
this strong association can do to
benefit them going forward whether it's
you know working while they're you know
to increase retirement benefits and post
career opportunities internships while
they're playing it you know
opportunities to help them go back and
get college degrees or graduate degrees
if that's what they're interested in and
everything that we do for players in the
present and then the you know and going
forward benefits the next generation of
players are gonna come behind so if
you've got a 10 year old at home who's
playing League of Legends and is really
good you know you should be really
supportive of the players association
because there's a decent chance that
that kid one day may be a member of the
Players Association and everything we
were able to accomplish now is gonna be
to the benefit of that kid and then
every kid that follows very good well
thank you so much for sitting down with
me excited to see what the Players
Association has in store throughout the
rest of 2018 and going forward so thanks
so much yeah appreciate everyone else
you can check out the restaurant
coverage of all things eSports right
here on my youtube channel